she was sheathed in a puffy pink coat , mounds of pink scarves , and a snow white knit hat with pale pink sparkles .
the jeep hit another hard rut just as nazaret sneezed , a cute , shrill little sound that was all but muffled in tiny pink alpaca mittens .
`` i hov i can still help you wif de kids , '' she sniffled , bleary hazel eyes turned on noah , who patted her on the white knit cap with a few encouraging words .
they all jerked to attention as the jeep braked to a halt in a sudden spray of gravel .
when the group piled out of the car , they discovered the air outside the car was even colder than inside .
even though it would look ridiculous , wara almost wished she was wearing snow pants , just like when she was little growing up in montana .
the frayed jeans and hippie tunic she had on under the alpaca sweater were not doing anything to keep her warm .
frozen fingers brushed lazily over her cheeks from the hulking mountains all around them .
off in the distance , something howled .
nazaret covered her nose with one mitten to muffle another sharp sneeze and it echoed off the mountains in the night .
`` 'scuse me . ''
noah cheerfully pushed past wara , carting a gigantic burlap sack of potatoes .
`` coming through , '' nazaret 's father followed him , hauling a second bag of something edible .
wara huddled next to nazaret for a minute , watching as the guys hefted the food and sleeping bags onto a haggle of scrawny burros .
a few quechua guys in black jackets and slacks had materialized from an adobe hut and were helping to arrange everything on the donkeys by the light of a shimmering bonfire .
pastor martir , who came every year to preach at this rural bible conference in potosi , said that it was best to climb the mountain at night , when it was cooler .
right now , wara really hoped he knew what he was talking about .
they still had a seven-hour hike ahead of them , up the forested granite .
she stifled a heavy yawn and fixed her gaze on the diamond stars .
in the morning , she woke up to scruffy feathers and a beak .
a chicken scratched through the pebbles right outside the crumbling adobe wall of the community school house where she and the others had crashed for a few hours after the hike .
the local christians had gone to all the trouble of fixing up wooden pallets with woolen blankets here at the school , so their guests could have a private place to stay .
wara knew they had gone to a lot of trouble and hated to admit that it honestly had n't been worth going to sleep .
a well-organized army of fleas had taken up residence in the wool blankets long before she had , and she , noah , and nazaret had scratched and grumbled for a few hours before pastor martir coated their beds with raid .
maybe that was why now , with daylight streaming through the holes in the schoolhouse wall , it was so darn hard to move .
could you overdose on raid ?
wara kicked off the sleeping bag , grabbed her glasses from the dirt floor , and pulled herself to sitting .
pastor martir was already gone , probably outside at some morning prayer vigil with the quechua christians .
nazaret curled on her plank bed , still snoring .
noah 's long legs stuck out the end of his unzipped sleeping bag , leaving his filthy socked feet sprawled in the dirt near giant maroon nike tennis shoes .
when she moved to stand up , the powdery remains of dried up fleas shifted on the navy fleece of the sleeping bag .
eeww .
wara had to grin at the sight of those dried bugs .
she really loved these kind of trips .
she dusted her bare feet off on the edge of her jeans and stuffed her sockless feet into doc marten boots , hoping to find someplace outside to use the bathroom before everyone else got up .
a waist-high cluster of boulders overlooking the valley below turned out to be the best option for privacy .
she brushed her teeth with water from a dented bottle of pura vida and spit off into the deserted valley .
trailing wisps of clouds slithered around boulders below .
the only structures visible were the schoolhouse where she had slept and two sturdy adobe houses a little way down the rounded path .
a quechua lady with a huge smile was waiting in the school with a breakfast of sweet purple corn drink and boiled eggs .
she wore a knee-length circle skirt called a pollera , this one a soft sage green .
despite the morning chill , her mahogany legs were bare and she wore scuffed black plastic ballet flats .
she did have on a warm cardigan over the lacy white blouse quechua ladies always wore .
the lady bringing breakfast introduced herself as doa petronia and patted wara on the forearm in greeting , telling her how happy she was that god had brought wara to this conference .
wara smiled back wanly , even though it was a lot of fun to be speaking quechua up in the mountains again .
she still did n't feel good about the idea of her being part of this bible conference , acting like she was all sweet and good here with pastor martir , noah and the bible school students .
she felt like a fake .
still queasy , she mumbled something appropriate and tried to get down the purple api and an egg .
they assigned her to help noah , who was in charge of the kids while their parents attended bible classes .
wara had already seen him in action many times during the five years they 'd been friends , teaching bible stories to kids at the martirs ' aids center or hanging out with a little homeless kid in downtown cochabamba .
within minutes , noah had the group of kids sitting on a grassy knoll and captivated by bible songs with actions .
then he made wara come stand next to him to translate a story into quechua , one about jesus calming the stormy sea .
she grew up in church and could rattle off this story by heart , in english , spanish , or quechua .
but there was no way she could keep a group of kids glued to her every word the way noah did .
she ignored the sick feeling in her stomach and stood next to noah , feeling little and insignificant at five foot five next to his six foot three .
all she had to do was tell noah 's story to the kids in quechua .
her own failings could n't ruin the moment for the kids .
noah deserved to be listened to .
when the story was over , she could see in the kids ' eyes that they had imagined every peal of thunder , felt the shuddering of the splintered wooden boat on the open sea .
noah asked the kids to come up and stand at his side , one by one , to tell him what they were afraid of .
`` that we wo n't have enough to eat if hail destroys the crops , '' mumbled one almond-eyed little boy in a jade chullu cap .
`` i 'm afraid of the terrible goat that lives down the hill . ''
several muffled giggles scattered across the group .
`` of the thunder when it storms . ''
one short boy in a tattered soccer jersey trudged to the front when it was his turn and recited gravely , `` i 'm scared that my other brothers will become one of the missing , like my brother antonio . ''
wara scrunched up her face .
she had never heard anyone refer to someone who died as `` the missing '' before in quechua , but maybe it was a regional idiom .
she was going to have to ask around later to figure out if that was really how that phrase should be used .
i 'm such a nerd .
she blinked away thoughts of quechua grammar and brought her attention back to noah , who was beaming at the children , then her , waiting for her to translate .
`` you know , when i was little , '' he told the kids , `` there was this dog that lived a few houses away from mine , and he had really , really big teeth . ''
suddenly , strangely , noah slung an arm over wara 's shoulders , leaving the two of them facing the children together .
`` i want you to know kids , if jesus is with you , you do n't have to be scared of anything .
he 's stronger than anything in this world . ''
just as mesmerized by noah 's words as the kids , wara felt herself leaning into his side .
then the lesson was over .
`` thanks for translating , '' noah told her , then dropped his arm and smiled .
wara felt her heart do a very weird pitter-patter and she stared after him as he jogged off to chase some of the kids in a game of tag .
that attraction you 're feeling ?
she chided herself warily .
that 's just because noah is your friend .
you would never think of noah as anything more than a friend .
right ?
wara blinked , then squinted at noah , who was grabbing a giggling little kid around the shoulders and swinging him in the air .
she would be crazy to let herself think of noah as anything other than a friend .
he was much too goofy for anything else .
wara was always studying and was sometimes really grouchy .
noah was always so happy-go-lucky and watched way too many cartoons .
not exactly prince charming .
plus , he did n't really know her .
wara shook herself back to reality and headed back down towards the house , thinking she should probably help the ladies fix lunch .
the cloud-covered valley writhed with mist , licking the emerald grass at her feet .
it was hauntingly beautiful .
in the rocky dirt outside the main house she found a circle of quechua women squatting in their wide velvet pollera skirts around a plastic tub of potatoes .
the ladies skillfully attacked the miniscule purple and yellow-veined potatoes with paring knives , leaving the spuds without peel in seconds .
wara hunkered down next to the smiling lady from breakfast this morning , doa petronia .
wara had tried so hard to learn to peel potatoes like a respectable quechua woman should , but she usually ended up desecrating the potato , scraping half of it off into the scrap pile .
she fiddled around a little with the knife and a bumpy yellow potato , then decided to put her grammar question out there .
`` i was wondering about something one of the kids said .
if you say that your family member is the missing , does that mean that person died ? ''
doa petronia 's long blade faltered mid-peel and she reached up with one work-roughed hand to flip a braid behind her back .
everyone fell silent .
`` you must have heard my son edgar talking , '' she finally nodded .
`` he 's only six but he is so worried about his older brother . ''
`` or maybe it was my juan marco talking about his older brother , '' interjected a more portly woman in a royal purple pollera .
a thick layer of fat rolled out of the waist of her skirt , blanketed with the silky white undershirt the ladies wore under their short lace blouses .
she jerked her chin towards doa petronia .
`` she and i both have older sons , teenagers .
three months ago , the boys both went away , never to be heard from again . ''
`` went away ? ''
wara frowned .
`` we call them 'the missing ' . ''
doa petronia looked wara directly in the eye .
`` the boys went into llallagua to sell some potatoes , but on completely different days .
we never heard from them again .
we do not know where they could have gone .
that is why we call them and the other boys 'the missing ' . ''
`` what other boys ? ''
the two women eyed each other soberly .
`` from all over the mountains , many different communities .
all missing . ''
wara did n't know what to say .
how could these women 's sons , and boys from other communities too , just be gone ?
the pain in the women 's black eyes was evident , and wara felt horrible .
how many of the people here at the bible conference had a son or brother who had just disappeared ?
i am really glad nazaret is still off teaching somewhere .
i hope she has n't already heard about this .
the martirs were a busy household of six kids , but once upon a time there had been seven .
wara knew nazaret 's older brother had run away when he was a teenager , and she knew the serious , skinny oldest martir only from his faded photograph in a frame on nazaret 's dresser .
talking about missing kids was always enough to start nazaret weeping .
wara really hoped her friend would n't hear about this .
it would only make her think of her brother , the missing boy who was probably never going to come home .
she could identify a little with that kid in the picture , because sometimes , when she thought too much about things , wara just wanted to run away from here and start over .
except the past always follows you .
noah was running up the hill panting , with a hundred screaming quechua kids close on his heels .
even if she wanted to be with noah , she would never deserve him .
there were some things that even time could n't erase .
2 gaudy gold peshawar , pakistan 2017 alejo perched above the ancient labyrinth that was old city peshawar , counting down the seconds until he would take a man 's life .
the tri-colored apartment complex where he waited soared to the cloudless sky , cream , cinnamon , and pistachio .
a giant block of neapolitan ice cream , sizzling under the peshawar heat .
in a dusty courtyard with solid walls below , the three men who marched between grave pakistani police were mere specks to alejo .
gabriel was at the scope , reporting the details of the scene below ; benjamin lay prone as alejo did , both of them one with the black rifles propped on sandbags .
`` so , they just entered the courtyard , '' gabriel said softly .
sweat poured down his pale face from the tightly-wrapped black turban .
they were alone on the cement rooftop high over peshawar , and abandoned the pashto language for their native spanish .
`` the paki police are pretty nervous .
ok !
here come the americans .
they 've all got bullet-proof vests . ''
gabriel 's bony fingers tightened on the scope and his voice rose with excitement .
not surprising .
the u.s. army would n't want any crazy talibs to take out their precious little prisoners before they get to `` justice '' now , would they ?
but how many years would the young soldiers get for murdering afghan children across the border and posting bloody trophy pictures on the internet ?
three years in a comfy cell with three meals a day ?
that was more than most afghan children could dream of .
security was tight around that little compound with the courtyard , as the whole surrounding area would like to see the american soldiers in pakistani custody mutilated and dead .
but no one would expect a shot to come from this distance .
a cacophony of horns blasted from the matchbox cars snaking along below .
the sound would cover the shot perfectly .
alejo shifted one leg , ever so slightly , letting blood flow back into one of his thighs that had been riding a rock for the past half-hour .
`` targets are moving towards the mark , '' gabriel said calmly .
he rolled into place in the line of three men on their stomachs and positioned his gun on the sandbag .
the three of them gazed through the gun scopes now at the american prisoners , blond and thin inside their bullet-proof vests .
alejo evened his breathing and willed his weak arm still .
he drew a slow lungful of air , then held it , finger exact and deathly-still on the trigger .
he heard each beat of his heart echo in his ear , steady and slow .
he waited until one heartbeat had just drummed , then murmured in the space between , `` now . ''
below in the old city , the timing was perfect .
an ornately-painted bus lumbering around the corner of the compound honked and belched black smoke , just as alejo 's bullet entered the medulla oblongata at the base of the middle soldier 's skull and he slumped to the dirt in a crimson mist .
the other two collapsed on top of him , the part of their brains that controls involuntary movements effectively destroyed .
it took a full five seconds for all hell to break loose in the courtyard as mustachioed policemen and high-up american officials all turned up dust diving for cover .
alejo could tell there was no need to take a second shot .
he felt cold , and lowered the rifle from his eyes , staring at the dim outline of the mountains encircling the city .
still lying low , he pulled a small gray cell phone from his pocket and punched a button .
ishmael khan , recruiter from the prism and alejo 's handler , would be pacing the floor in his mansion until he heard the soldiers were dead .
alejo set his jaw , then motioned to benjamin and gabriel .
they slunk into the tri-color apartment building and into a room filled with grimy shalwar kameezs , ammunition , and cigarette butts .
afghan-made cigarettes .
this was the kind of hole taliban fighters always frequented , and whoever one day discovered this place alejo had set up would not be surprised to see a slew of rifles on the kitchen table next to the moldering rice and half-eaten naan bread .
everyone in peshawar packed lead .
slick with sweat and fine concrete dust , the three men dumped their soiled shalwar kameezs with the rest of the filthy clothes on the bathroom floor and pulled on jeans and t-shirts , the clothes of upper-class pakistani students .
with bronze skin , wavy black hair , and perfect pashto , alejo never had problems passing as a pakistani on his many trips to the country .
the other two guys on his team were also from bolivia , a little lighter-skinned than alejo but they still passed as pakistani or afghani .
`` death to the infidels , '' gabriel grinned , stuffing wads of tattered rupee bills into a bag around his thin chest .
benjamin and alejo rolled their eyes .
`` goodness , i 'm just kidding . ''
gabriel flashed merry eyes at them and winked .
`` let 's get out of here . ''
the throbbing wail of a siren cut through the heat outside the apartment building , racing towards the murdered americans .
the white orb of midday sun still blazed through the murky haze of pollution over the city .
and less than twenty blocks away , three lives had just been extinguished .
they were getting away .
the three of them would walk through this entire maze of a city , get to the khan 's house , and report a successful mission .
alejo tried to tell himself he should be happy .
at least a little .
that night , the feast at ishmael khan 's house was bounteous .
alejo and his team sat on burgundy and ivory carpets , faced with silver platters of seared roti bread and lamb curry .
milky tea simmered in bone white porcelain , rich with sugar crystals and cardamom .
the rest of his team was having the time of their life in the marble hall of the khan 's mansion , but alejo needed to get out of there .
he made his excuses to the entire clan of khan relatives and navigated peshawar 's labyrinth streets back to the apartment that was always waiting for him here in pakistan .
